---
title: Hashing
image: sha-256-hash.jpg
subTitle: Lets take a look at one of the first building blocks of a block chain; hashing and in particular SHA-256.
---

First of all a hash is a one way function that takes an arbitrarily sized block of data and produces a fixed size result. The result is usually much smaller than the input. There is no way to rebuild the input from the output of a hash function because most of the information is thrown away i.e. It is a "one way function". I could never list all the uses for a hash, but here are a few:

* A hash could be used to validate that a message has not become been corrupted (intentionally or unintentionally) by sending the hash of the message with the message. We talked about this in the [Blockchain Post]({% post 2018-08-01-blockchain %}).
* It can also be a way to check for duplicates. Instead of comparing every single byte of data that you already have to the data you are checking, you could just check if the hash of the data you are checking matches the hashes of the data you already have.
* It is a good idea to store the hash of the password rather than the password itself. You check that the password provided is correct by calculating the hash of the supplied password to the one on file. This way if your user data was ever anciently exposed, because of the one way nature of hashes, the password can't easily be recovered.
* They are often used as a way to index large data sets. Storing the hash as a pointer to the data in the index makes the index much smaller and faster to search.
* And of corse they are used for all sorts of interesting things (like "zero knowledge commitments") in blockchain.

Ok so a hash is super useful, but how do they work? To answer that question, let's create a hash function. I call it XorHash. We XOR all the bytes in the stream together to produce the hash. I call it XorHash.

``` c#
using System;
using System.Text;

public class Program
{
  public static void Main()
  {
    Hash("This is some text");
    Hash("More text");
    Hash("More Text");
    Hash("ABC");
    Hash("CBA");
    // Output:
    // This is some text: 191
    // More text: 162
    // More Text: 130
    // ABC: 234
    // CBA: 234
  }

  private static void Hash(string message)
  {
    var bytes = Encoding.Default.GetBytes(message);
    var hash = ComputeXorHash(bytes);
    Console.WriteLine($"{message}: {hash}");
  }

  private static byte ComputeXorHash(byte[] data)
  {
    byte hash = 0b10101010;
    foreach(byte b in data)
    {
      hash ^= b;
    }
    return hash;
  }
}

```

There you go, we have a hash function. As you can see, each input produces a unique output even if you change just one character. While this may technically be a hash function, it is not a very good hash function. "ABC" and "CBA" produce the same hash (called a collision).

A good hash function will produce a result that is virtually guaranteed to be unique. Three things make for a good hash function Pre-image resistance, Second pre-image resistance and Collision resistance.

#### Pre-image resistance

This refers to the one way nature of the function. What it mean is that if we have the output of the hash function, it should be very difficult to find the input. XorHash ticks this box.

#### Second pre-image resistance

This states that if you have the input to the hash function, it should be very difficult to create another input that will produce the same output. XorHash is definitely not second pre-image resistant, we just reversed the input and it produced the same result. Oops.

#### Collision resistance

This stated that it should be very hard for to create two different inputs to the hash function that will produce the same output. It is a slight tweak on the previous requirement, but in this case we do not given the original message. XorHash only has 256 possible outputs. Generating a collision is trivial. Ouch!

We will definitely have to get some help by smart people for a good hash. The super smart people who created bitcoin decided to use SHA-256. If it is good enough for bitcoin, it should definitely be good enough for us.

### SHA-256

SHA stands for Secure Hashing Algorithm. SHA-256 is an implementation of the SHA-2 algorithm, published by the NSA in 2001. It supersedes SHA-1 because that was found to be insecure. SHA-256 produces hashes of 256 bits long (hence the name) as opposed to XorHash that produces only 8 bits.

It works by creating and initialization array from "first 32 bits of the fractional parts of the cube roots of the first sixty-four prime numbers". So basically random numbers. It then splits the data up into 512 bit chunks and dose a bunch of bit shifting, XORing and the likes. There is very little learning to be had by implementing the SHA-2 algorithm as it is just a much more complicated version of what we did in the XorHash. Of corse it produces much bigger and more robust results.

Bouncy Castle's implementation can be viewed at <https://github.com/bcgit/bc-csharp/blob/master/crypto/src/crypto/digests/Sha256Digest.cs>.
