---
title: SHA-256 Hash
image: sha-256-hash.jpg
subTitle: Lets take a look at one of the first building blocks of a block chain; hashing and in particular SHA-256.
---

First of all a hash is a one way function that takes an arbitrarily sized block of data and produces a fixed size result. The result is usually much smaller than the input. There is no way to rebuild the input from the output of a hash function because most of the information is thrown away. A good hash function will produce a result that is virtually guaranteed to be unique. Three things make for a god hash function Pre-image resistance, Second pre-image resistance and Collision resistance.

#### Pre-image resistance
This refers to the one way nature of the function. What it mean is that if we have the output of the hash function, it should be very difficult to find the input.

#### Second pre-image resistance
This states that if you have the input to the hash function, it should be very difficult to create another input that will produce the same output.

#### Collision resistance
This stated that it should be very hard for to create two different inputs to the hash function that will produce the same output. It is a slight tweak on the previous requirement, but in this case we do not given the original message.

Hashes can be used in a number of ways. First we could use them to verify a message. If we have the hash of a message and the message it's self, we can validate that the message has not been tampered with by comparing the original hash to the hash we calculate of the message. Another use could be for storing passwords. Instead of storing the actual password for a user, you just store the hash. When you need to authenticate the user you calculate the hash of the password that the user provided and compare it to the stored password. If they match the password is correct. This way you do not run the risk of hackers steeling the users password. They are also useful for storing or transmitting "zero knowledge commitments", but that is a topic for another blog post.

### SHA-256
So now that we have spoken about hashing in general, let's look a an implementation. There are a number of hash functions, but I am going to dig into SHA-512, because that is what is used in Bitcoin.

SHA stands for Secure Hashing Algorithm. SHA-512 is an implementation of the SHA-2 algorithm, published by the NSA in 2001. It supersedes SHA-1 because that was found to be insecure.
